One of the most prominent instances that made me realize the deep-seated educational disparities for minority and lower-income students occurred when I tested a 5th grade Philadelphia public school student named Jenna. Her results revealed that Jenna was barely capable of reading on a 1st grade level. Despite the fact that my interaction with Jenna left me upset and frustrated, it catalyzed my desire to work towards narrowing the achievement and opportunity gaps that students and school systems encounter in our country. 

Pursuing a Master’s degree in Sociology and Education at Teachers College will empower me to better support underserved students by gaining a comprehensive understanding of the U.S. education system, engaging with professors who are leaders in the field of urban education, and acquiring research skills that will enable me to critically analyze school systems from a sociological perspective. I am determined to attend Teachers College because my goal is to translate theory into practice while studying in the heart of one of the largest and most diverse school districts in the country. My experience as a Posse Scholar at Bryn Mawr College and working in the education nonprofit sphere in Philadelphia has allowed me to interpret the education system from a number of diverse viewpoints. However, I strive to gain a deeper understanding of education policy, strategies, and theories in order to further inform my career in education, specifically within K-12 reform and college access.

After graduating Bryn Mawr College as a Posse Foundation Scholar, I recognized the transformative potential that a quality education has on the lives of students who are products of under-resourced school districts. During my time at Bryn Mawr I took classes such as Race, Gender and Culture and The Black Self: Identity and Consciousness which dissected race and social identity from a perspective that allowed me to better understand systemic racism and how communities of color shape and mold their consciousness. These courses, coupled with complex conversations about race and social justice, stimulated my passion to combat the forces and mindsets that continue to disadvantage minority youths. My involvement as a Posse Scholar fueled my determination to empower students and led me to become a freshman peer mentor to first-generation and international students during my senior year. While pursuing my undergraduate degree, I had the opportunity to produce an independent qualitative thesis entitled, The Role of Communication in Developing Bryn Mawr College Students’ Religious Identity. I obtained invaluable analytical skills, utilized various methods of collecting qualitative and quantitative data, and became inspired to eventually refine my research skills at the graduate level. My multifaceted experience as a student motivated me to pursue a career in education nonprofits and work at organizations that focus on youth development, race, and social justice.

My entry into professional education began at Leading Educators, a nonprofit dedicated to identifying high quality teachers in the D.C. public school system for their Teacher Leadership Fellowship. This organization exposed me to the opportunity gaps that lower-income students face within the D.C. public school system and fueled my passion to advocate for educational equity. While I learned many technical skills, such as grant writing and event planning, the most beneficial aspect of the role came from engaging with principals, teachers, and policy makers from the Department of Education. These interactions compelled me to explore educational issues first-hand, stimulated my desire to work with students directly, and galvanized me to dissect the complex connections between K-12 reform and college access. My current position at For Love of Children (FLOC) involves supporting students like Jenna who are severely below grade level and have limited access to quality educational resources. As a Scholars Program Coordinator, I facilitate free after-school workshops on grade-based curriculum as well as postsecondary preparation for 8th and 11th grade students from the D.C. community. During my time at FLOC, I have refined our 11th grade SAT program, which is now more individualized to each student’s skill level in math and reading. Each week, I collaborate with their tutors by receiving feedback on student progress and adjusting the difficulty of their practice tests to ensure they are strengthening areas of improvement. As I work with students to achieve their postsecondary goals, they begin to see their own potential and build confidence. However, there are still many faults in our K-12 public education system that continue to prevent students of all racial and socio-economic backgrounds from receiving an equitable education. Although I have expanded my knowledge of urban education and college access while working in the nonprofit sector, acquiring a Master’s degree at Teachers College will provide me with the fundamental skills and resources needed to effectively support a diversity of students.

Having the opportunity to attend and take courses at Teachers College with innovators such as Amy Stuart Wells truly excites me because of my admiration for her research on race and school desegregation. In April 2016, I had the opportunity to hear Professor Wells speak at a seminar titled, Taking Action on School Diversity. Her speech inspired me to explore the policies and practices being implemented in order to attain racial diversity in schools around the country. I am also eager to explore Professor Jeffrey Henig’s work on reforming urban schools and analyzing the intersections of race, politics, and education in urban environments. The unique perspectives of these and other educators will provide me with the tools necessary to build upon my own experiences in the field of education. Additionally, after speaking with several students currently in the Sociology & Education program and attending an open house, I can think of no institution more perfectly suited to my interests and ambitions. I am confident in my abilities to excel as a graduate student and apply the newfound research methods, theories, and strategies to all my future professional endeavors in education.