I am a student of social policy, a civic engagement practitioner, a designer and an elite athlete (in fact, last time I visited Penn’s campus I was competing against your fencing team). In all, I’m a multidisciplinary thinker. I know that innovative solutions are created through an intersection of disciplines and a diversity of practices. I am pursuing graduate study in order to further my ability to innovate and to address problems using manifold strategies. The Master of Integrated Product Design program at University of Pennsylvania is an opportunity not only to deepen my design practice but to strengthen it through innovative engineering and clever business practices. I am seeking opportunities to extend my tools for making a difference and I believe that the M:IPD program at Penn would do just that. 

When I started my first quarter at Northwestern University all I knew was that I wanted to study something that would allow me to leverage my education for the betterment of communities. Eventually, I landed on Social Policy, a degree that would provide the opportunity to challenge systems and learn the methodologies necessary to improve those systems. Despite my interest in making change at the policy level, I was hungry for opportunities to engage with issues in a more hands-on way. So, I pursued and completed two additional certificates: the Civic Engagement Certificate and the Design Certificate, both as a means of doing hands-on work to improve the lives of community members. Now, I am seeking graduate study for similar reasons. I want to deepen my creative practice through study of new methodologies in order to increase my breadth and efficacy as a designer.

As a designer, I am focused on two main domains. Much of my design work centers around accessibility. I seek to utilize design to increase access to experiences, products and opportunities. One community that I’m particularly moved by and interested in designing for, is that of aging or older adults. A project in my portfolio, “CareBot” is an example of my work in this domain as it seeks to provide older adults with access to community, family, and empathetic medical care. In my time in the M:IPD program, I would be interested in continuing and expanding upon this focus. The engineering aspect of the program is especially interesting to me as I believe it would provide tangible means of innovation in order to bolster my aesthetic design work. I know that courses such as “Rehab Engineering & Design” would be integral to leveraging engineering methodologies for creating real-world impact. 

My other domain of interest is within the field of technology ethics. Issues such as cell phone addiction, data privacy, and artificial intelligence development all intrigue me. I strongly believe that technology can be developed in a way that prioritizes human connection, empathy, and access. Using systems-level design solutions, I am interested in transforming not only technology products but also the process used to develop those products in order to craft humanistic technology solutions. Penn’s multidisciplinary framework is uniquely situated to help me create thoughtful and effective design solutions to technology’s most pressing issues. No consequential innovation can be created using just one discipline but rather requires tactful marrying of many key practices. I recognize that in order to improve quality of life through my design work I require a deeper understanding of business strategy and engineering practices. As such, I am excited about the ability to focus on a number of electives in order to take advantage of the M:IPD’s three-pronged focus and develop skills across human-centered design disciplines, especially in engineering. 

Though Northwestern University does not have a full design degree program, I created my own path through my studies. Through the Segal Design Certificate program, I developed skills in human-centered design methodologies. I have a strong understanding of the product development process and the steps required to deliver on complex problems. To augment the program, I also participated in Advanced Design’s “Offsite” program which seeks to give developing designers the skills necessary to excel in design programs and studios. Consequently, I have proficiency in CAD, Keyshot, sketching, and physical prototyping methods. I am confident that I have the necessary skills to execute design projects, communicate my ideas, and craft effective solutions to problems that require innovation. Studying in the Weitzman School of Design and Penn Engineering would deepen this skillset and further expand it, so as to provide the skills necessary to deliver on my ideas. 

I have also held a number of work and internship experiences that would inform my work as both a student and a community member at Penn. In my role at Unity Technologies, I worked to identify issues with the grant evaluation process utilized by Unity’s Social Impact team. As a result of research, observation, and ideation I overhauled the grant writing and evaluation process to increase efficacy and ease of use. Currently, I work as a Design Lead at Iris Education, a startup that seeks to provide reliable and accessible information about US universities to international students. There, I run a team of four designers and developers to design the UI/UX and implement thoughtful design decisions into code. No matter my role in previous organizations, I am seen as a critical thinker and team player. Whether it be implementing one line of code or unifying a team to deliver an entire product, I am always striving to be a thoughtful and impactful problem-solver. If given the opportunity, I would work to continue growing as a leader in the Penn community and honing my collaborative skills on projects with my peers. 

I want to be a truly innovative designer, working to increase equity and community. I see study at Penn as an invaluable opportunity to become a triple-threat problem solver, a chameleon that can be impactful in nearly any problem solving situation. To me, the M:IPD program would provide the best path towards becoming a more effective and adroit designer. Penn’s multidisciplinary approach and community resonate with me. I have many interests, from studying social policy to playing multiple instruments to being an elite fencer, and I thrive in communities where a wide variety of interests are not only celebrated but enhanced. I am looking for a learning community that sits at the intersection of my multidisciplinary interests. The last time I was on Penn’s campus was when I was competing against Penn’s women’s fencing team. Next year I hope to be on the other side, a member of the Penn educational community, cheering on my new home team. 